The purpose of this research is to demonstrate how quantum concepts relating to the state of photons as quantum particles can be used to validate the BB84 cryptography protocol to encrypt communications – the use of single photons can be used to encode information while their polarizations encrypt that information. To achieve this demonstration, a statistical analysis of bit-match possibilities in key generations is used to theoretically demonstrate the workings of the BB84 protocol; while quantum concepts like Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle and Wootter’s “No-Cloning” theorem, which constitute the foundation of those workings, is also discussed. Physically, Thorlabs Quantum Cryptography Kit is used to pulse light, polarize it, and detect it via a beamsplitter to tangibly demonstrate the viability of the BB84 protocol. In doing so, the theoretical expectation that an eavesdropper can be detected 100% of the time is achieved by demonstrating that the error in bit-matching approaches 25% if an eavesdropper is present. Linked to this repository is a full paper detailing theory, procedure, and results.

Python is used to simulate the number of test bits sent during the encryption. The program first generates test bits and bases depending on either the size of an input message or an arbitrarily set size. Polarizations are then set for the sender, eavesdropper, and receiver symbolically based on the test bits and bases and the corresponding bit is generated for the receiver. The percent error in key generation due to the eavesdropper is then calculated in the same way and reported.
This general program was also used to view the characteristics of the percent error in key generation over various test bit sizes. For this, various test bit
sizes (10, 50, 100, 500, 1,000, 5,000, 10,000) are chosen and the same overall procedure is followed. For each test bit size, 1000 individual simulations are
run. The results can then be collectively plotted and examined statistically to analyze certain trends based on test bit size.